ORM 2.9 release post (#402)
doctrine/doctrine-website: source/blog/2021-05-12-orm2.9.md

---
title: "New Release: Doctrine ORM 2.9 with Attributes, Typed Properties, more"
authorName: Benjamin Eberlei
authorEmail: kontakt@beberlei.de
permalink: /2021/05/12/orm2.9.html
---

> We have released a new minor version Doctrine ORM 2.9, the first version with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have released a new minor version 2.9 of Doctrine ORM, the first version with
```

    #[ORM\InverseJoinColumn(name: "tag_id", referencedColumnName: "id")]
    public Collection $tags;
}
```

## Typed Property Defaults

Since PHP 7.4 types can be declared on class properties and Doctrine now
uses these type declarations to reduce amount of mapping boilerplate:

- Columns don't need the type definitions
- ManyToOne and OneToOne don't need target entity definitions

Example:

```php
use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping AS ORM;

#[ORM\Entity(repositoryClass: UserRepository::class)]
class User
{
    #[ORM\Id, ORM\Column, ORM\GeneratedValue]
    public ?int $id = null;

    #[ORM\Column]
    public \DateTime $created;

    #[ORM\ManyToOne]
    public Email $email;
}
```

## Psalmified APIs

Improved the documentation to make sure static analysis tools and IDEs know
about the right entity classes returned from `EntityManager`,
`EntityRepository` and other public ORM APIs. This includes generics support
when you extend `EntityRepository`.

```php
use Doctrine\ORM\EntityRepository;
use App\Entity\User;

/**
 * @template-extends EntityRepository<User>
 */
class UserRepository extends EntityRepository
{
}
```

## Query::HINT_READ_ONLY

> A new query hint is added that allow hydrating entities through DQL that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new query hint is added that allows hydrating entities through DQL that are
```

loaded as writeable:

```php
$dql = 'SELECT u FROM ' . ReadOnlyEntity::class . ' u WHERE u.id = ?1';

$query = $entityManager->createQuery($dql);
$query->setParameter(1, $user->id);
$query->setHint(Query::HINT_READ_ONLY, true);

$user = $query->getSingleResult();
```

## Index/UniqueConstraints using Field Names

Instead of specifying column names for an index or unique-constraint declaration
you can now alterntively use field names.

```php
#[Entity]
#[Index(fields: ["isPublished"])]
class Post
{
    #[Column]
    public bool $isPublished = false;
}
```

This simplifies mapping as the column names passed through the naming strategy
do not need to be known.

## INDEX BY Associations

Previously DQL `INDEX BY` was not possible for assocations, now you can:

```php
$dql = 'SELECT p, u FROM Post INDEX BY p.author JOIN p.author u WHERE p.id = 3';
```

## Deprecations

Doctrine ORM 2.9 rethinks deprecations and integrates with our new
[doctrine/deprecations](https://github.com/doctrine/deprecations/) library.

- Undeprecate `merge()` and `detach()` as no replacements are available yet
- Notify Persist Change Tracking: Use Explicit Change Tracking instead

> - DQL `SELECT PARTIAL` syntax, use Value Objects instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DQL `SELECT PARTIAL` syntax, use Value Objects with `SELECT NEW` instead
```

- `EntityManager::flush()` with arguments
- `EntityManager::clear()` with arguments (use detach)
- Named Queries in Mapping (use Repository)
- `cli-config.php` for console command configuration, inject `EntityManagerProvider` instead.
- Deprecate `doctrine/cache` for metadata caching, use PSR-6 cache instead

## PHP 7.1 Support

ORM 2.9 reintroduces PHP 7.1 support, because it wasn't technically unsupported
anyways.  No changes were necessary to the code to allow it again except in the
testsuite.

The PHP 7.1 support was re-added to allow a very broad approach to prepare for

> some of the deprecations that we are going to prepare making for ORM 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some of the deprecations that we are going to introduce in ORM 3.
```
